Nice Orderable concern (#124)
andycroll/andycroll.com: _posts/2021/2021-04-26-order-by-created-and-updated-with-a-concern.md

---
title: "Order by created_at and updated_at with a concern"
description: "If you sort models by timestamps regularly, this is nice"
layout: article
category: ruby
image:
  base: "2021/order-by-created-and-updated-with-a-concern"
  alt: "Food Truck Festival ’ drive-by’"
  source: "https://unsplash.com/photos/1SjD5ZEiUsA"
  credit: "Micheile Henderson"
---

Rails provides `scopes` as a way to encapsulate your regularly used queries. I've suggested before that it's a good idea to [keep calls to the query API within models](/ruby/only-use-named-scopes-ouside-models/).

> Rails also includes [Active Support's concerns](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Concern.html) as a way to group functionality that's used in multiple places. It's a wrapper around a standard Ruby `module`.

Reviewer: Maybe capitalise 'concerns'.

> We're often sorting models in our applications by the time they are created or updated, using the [built-in timestamps](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Timestamp.html).

Reviewer: Maybe tie this paragraph to the last one by saying something like: something we often want to do in multiple places in our app is sort models based on...

Will help the flow a little bit.

> Let's see how to combine these techniques to provide a useful mini library in our application.

Reviewer: Let's use Concerns to develop a useful mini library within our application that gives us this functionality — or something like that...

### `app/controllers/books_controller.rb`

```ruby
class BooksController
  def index
    @books = Book.order(created_at: :asc).limit(20)
  end
end
```

Or, better, using a named scope:

### `app/models/book.rb`

```ruby
class Book < ApplicationRecord
  scope :by_recently_created, -> { order(created_at: :desc) }
end
```

### `app/controllers/books_controller.rb`

```ruby
class BooksController
  def index
    @books = Book.by_recently_created.limit(20)
  end
end
```

## Use...

...this handy concern:

### `app/models/concerns/orderable_by_timestamp.rb`

```ruby
module OrderableByTimestamp
  extend ActiveSupport::Concern

  included do
    scope :by_earliest_created, -> { order(created_at: :asc) }
    scope :by_recently_created, -> { order(created_at: :desc) }
    scope :by_earliest_updated, -> { order(updated_at: :asc) }
    scope :by_recently_updated, -> { order(updated_at: :desc) }
  end
end
```

### `app/models/book.rb`

```ruby
class Book < ApplicationRecord
  include OrderableByTimestamp
end

```

### `app/controllers/books_controller.rb`

```ruby
class BooksController
  def index
    @books = Book.by_recently_created.limit(20)
  end
end
```

> And you can reuse the `OrderableByTimestamp` in multiple models, now you have the scopes extracted into a concern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And now that you have the scopes extracted into a concern, you can reuse `OrderableByTimestamp` in multiple models.
```

## Why?

This shows the magic of the different parts of Rails working together to perform a common refactor.

> This refactor uses these useful features of Rails to extract regularly reused functionality into one place. You might see this referred to as [DRY](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself)-ing up your code.

Reviewer: *takes advantage of useful features of Rails...

## Why not?

> Including four fairly generic scopes into multiple models, if you don't use every scope, might be expanding the model unnecessarily. This is a reason to keen any concerns you build as small as you can.

Reviewer: *keep

---

> title: "Order by created_at and updated_at with a concern"

Author: ```suggestion
title: "Order by created_at and updated_at with scopes and a concern"
```

> description: "If you sort models by timestamps regularly, this is nice"

Author: ```suggestion
description: "Refactoring smartly by using parts of Rails together"
```

layout: article
category: ruby
image:
  base: "2021/order-by-created-and-updated-with-a-concern"
  alt: "Food Truck Festival ’ drive-by’"
  source: "https://unsplash.com/photos/1SjD5ZEiUsA"
  credit: "Micheile Henderson"
---

> Rails provides `scope`s as a way to encapsulate your regularly used queries. I've suggested before that it's a good idea to [keep calls to the query API within models](/ruby/only-use-named-scopes-ouside-models/).

Reviewer: * Should 'scope' be in backticks?
* *regularly-used

This paragraph feels a little of balance...maybe it needs a connector...or switching it around "I've previously suggested that ...and Rails provides...".

Author: ```suggestion
I've suggested before that it's a good idea to [keep calls to the query API within models](/ruby/only-use-named-scopes-ouside-models/) and Rails provides `scope`s as a way to encapsulate regularly-used queries.
```

Rails also includes [Active Support's Concerns](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/Concern.html) as a way to group functionality that's used in multiple places. It's a wrapper around a standard Ruby `module`.

> Something we often want to do in multiple places in our applications is sorting models by the time they are created or updated, using the [built-in timestamps](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Timestamp.html).

Reviewer: *models or 'objects'?

Author: Models.

> Let's combine these two techniques to provide a useful mini library in our application to provide this functionality.

Reviewer: *the two previously-mentioned(?) techniques

  end
end
```

Or, better, using a named scope:

### `app/models/book.rb`

```ruby
class Book < ApplicationRecord
  scope :by_recently_created, -> { order(created_at: :desc) }
end
```

### `app/controllers/books_controller.rb`

```ruby
class BooksController
  def index
    @books = Book.by_recently_created.limit(20)
  end
end
```

## Use...

...this handy concern:

### `app/models/concerns/orderable_by_timestamp.rb`

```ruby
module OrderableByTimestamp
  extend ActiveSupport::Concern

  included do
    scope :by_earliest_created, -> { order(created_at: :asc) }
    scope :by_recently_created, -> { order(created_at: :desc) }
    scope :by_earliest_updated, -> { order(updated_at: :asc) }
    scope :by_recently_updated, -> { order(updated_at: :desc) }
  end
end
```

### `app/models/book.rb`

```ruby
class Book < ApplicationRecord
  include OrderableByTimestamp
end

```

### `app/controllers/books_controller.rb`

```ruby
class BooksController
  def index
    @books = Book.by_recently_created.limit(20)
  end
end
```

And now that you have the scopes extracted into a concern, you can reuse `OrderableByTimestamp` in multiple models.

## Why?

> This shows the magic of the different parts of Rails working together to perform a common refactor.

Reviewer: *'realise' instead of 'perform'? Because the refactor has been done...and now we can enjoy the magic (if that makes sense).

Or maybe instead: This common refactor highlights/showcases the magic of the different parts of Rails working together.

Or something like that.

Author: ```suggestion
This common refactor showcases the magic of multiple parts of Rails working together
```

> This refactor takes advantage of these useful features of the Rails framework to extract regularly reused functionality into one place. You might see this referred to as [DRY](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself)-ing up your code.

Reviewer: This feels like repeating what you said before, but just being more explicit. Maybe you can make it flow more by changing this part to read something more like: "We've taken advantage of useful parts of the Rails framework to..."

I think starting with "this refactor" again feels a little clunky.

Author: ```suggestion
We've taken advantage of these useful features to extract regularly reused functionality into one place. You might see this referred to as [DRY](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself)-ing up your code.
```
